Red- concerned
Green - happy
Blue - laughing 
Purple - hopeful
Yellow - emersed 
Factual - white
  


I remember when I was a king. (pause) Forty feet in the air. Okay– maybe twenty. (smile, light laugh beat)


It was me, Henry, and Jack.  My neighbors. (gestures for this next part) Three planks of cedar wood wedged between branches made up our castle.  Our village was full of riches: ample pinecones, rusted nails, and an ice-cold six-pack of Coca-Cola. (beat) Where were our parents? (pause) Who knows, but for that two-hour window (slow down), we ruled a kingdom. (pause)


As I got older, my world slowly started to look different. My days became structured: (count on fingers) school, sports, camps, playdates. (beat) Every hour had a plan. (beat) At nine I was an all-star quarterback in Yorkville flag football– a league composed of the most athletic little Jewish boys on the Upper East Side. (pause for laugh) I was constantly busy. (pause) Happy, (small beat) but busy. (pause)


Whatever little pockets did exist– the walk home, a break between activities, a nice long poop– those moments were mine. (gesture to self)


At the age of 11, this changed, though. (step to side?) It changed because at 11 I got my first iphone, and from then on (small beat), free space was a relic of the past. This was my 4th ever post, the caption? #swag #yoyo. I got ___ likes. I was hooked. (laugh pause) Every moment suddenly became an excuse to be (gesture this) looking down. 


Anytime boredom appeared, I reached for my phone. I became afraid of silence. I was constantly irritated, anxious(pause)… and alone.


My story it’s a common one you’ve heard before: Happy kid gets iphone and becomes sad, anxious, depressed teenager. (beat) This was the story I believed. (pause) But what if the truth is a lot more complicated?
(pause, step back to other side)
When I was 15, COVID hit. (beat) School shut down and suddenly I had two weeks with nothing scheduled. No classes. No practice. No pretending to pay attention in spanish class. (pause) Just time. (pause)Lacrosse season approaching, and I had a vision: fourteen days of training camp. I wanted to dominate the preppy white boys this season.(pause for laughter)
To limit my distractions and help me focus, I deleted my socials and decided to meditate every day. This was 


Everday I trained, meditated, and hiked. It was amazing
For the first time since I was a kid in that treehouse, hours in my day belonged to me. Meditation helped me stay inside that space instead of fearing it. I felt independent, peaceful, confident, like a king again. 


I had solved my mental health issues. Boom, mic drop. Milly Rock, enlightenment, achieved. And like a white mom who finds a new brand of hummus, I needed to share my findings with everyone. 


At 17, my friend Kei and I launched our first social media detox: The Happiness Project. We convinced our friends to delete their socials– mainly by bribing them with Chipotle. We ate meals together, jounreled, and meditated. Every morning, you’d see a group of high schoolers huddled in the library sitting [pause] in silence.


It was radical.


Afterwards my friends told me they didn’t miss their phones. Some even kept their social media deleted. I was thrilled! Social media is the problem. Detoxing is the cure.


Ka-boom.


All my friends’ mental health: solved. Dr. Phil ain’t got nothing on me. So what’s next?


By 20 I was speaking at schools about social media, leading detoxes, and producing a documentary.  At this time, more than 30 U.S. states were introducing phone bans in schools, and parents across the country were waking up to the problem.


Everything was falling into place.  But soon, my core beliefs began to falter.
It started with an experiment I did for my documentary. Inspired by Morgan Spurlock’s Supersize me, I decided to go back onto social media. For an entire month, I scrolled for 5 hrs, every day to prove how dangerous these apps were. I’d wake up and scroll, do homework, and scroll, I scrolled so much Instagram started sending me Jesus reels, logically assuming I was a come again christian in need of religious awakening. 


NOw, I went I’d either I’d become clinically depressed… or brain dead . But the crazy part was it wasn’t that bad.
I was on my phone a lot… but I was also hanging out with friends, going to club meetings, and dancing at parties.


My sleep scores, heart rate, and stress levels were all normal. Social media didn’t feel nearly as destructive as I remembered.




Then I started reading about all those phone bans in schools. Teachers love them. Focus improves. It’s good. But in terms of addressing the mental health crisis, research suggests there’s no link between banning phones and improving anxiety or depression. So what’s going on?


The moment it all clicked for me was last fall. I was speaking at a school in Florida about the dangers of social media. Afterwards Jack, a 10th grader, came up to me:


“Ben, I love your talk. I agree with you. Phones are bad.” 
“But I can’t delete my socials.”
He said, “I can’t because I’ve tried before. I last about a week. Then the cravings [pause] get too strong.”
[pause]
“Ben, I don’t have a car. I don’t live near my friends. There’s no park in my neighborhood.”
[pause]: “I literally have nothing to do… except be on my phone.”




[pause]
When I was younger, I spent hours scrolling because I craved connection. Yes, I had structure, I had activities from sunup to sundown, but I had no community, no neighborhood, no space to hang out with friends. I needed my phone as an escape mechanism.


7 years later when I did my social media binge, I didn’t need to escape from anything. I had a strong support network, a community, activities, friends, space in my life.


The missing piece of this mental health crisis, the reason why phone bans aren’t a golden cure is because we have a deeper issue that extends beyond the screen. We have a crisis of space. And the crazy part is, the thing nobody talks about, is that this space started disappearing long before the phone ever arrived. 


Take community. I used to think our phones destroyed communal spaces– clubs, churches, neighborhood groups. But that’s not true. From [a]the 1960s to the 1990s, a younger generation more detached from WW2 was less civically minded, suburbanization spread communities farther apart,  and television becoming widespread all combined to make Americans lose civic life. PTA participation fell by half. Fraternal clubs shrank dramatically. Bowling league, yes bowling league, places where people competed, in bowling, dropped 40% in participation. This is while total number of bowlers went up. So more people were bowling, but alone. 


Next, let’s look at Free play. We may imagine that kids stopped playing outside when that damn iPad came out.  In reality this happened in the 70s/80s. There was a massive kidnapping scare and parents got terrified that their kids would get snatched off the street. This, combined with new educational pressures and a smaller family size, created a new normal where exploration became a risk. “Don’t go outside!” “Stranger danger!” “If you see a white van, it’s definitely a pedophile trying to traffic you!” 


Once we lost exploration, we lost community, we lost that space, that’s when a mental health crisis slowly arose.


We usually see graphs like this, showcasing suicide spiking for boys and girls after 2010 when social media got popular. You want to see something crazy though?


If we zoom out and start looking at the year 1950 we start to see a totally different story. The full timeline shows us that the suicide epidemic started far before social media, actually almost a half-century earlier. In fact, between 1950 and 2005 suicide for kids under the age of 15 [pause] quartrupeled. 
So Yes, screens are part of the mental health crisis. But they didn’t create that problem. In many ways, they filled a space that was already empty. And if we don’t rebuild that space, rebuild the community that disappeared before Facebook ever hit the internet, then this mental health crisis will still be there, even if the phones aren’t. 
Ok, so what do we do about this? Well, look, I’m not a PHD, I’m not an MD, I’m barely past puberty, but I do have some ideas. 


I think this entire conversation has been framed around taking away. Let’s take away the screens, the phones, the apps. Me, I’m focussed not on what we’re taking away but what are we giving back?


For younger kids, let’s give back free play. This was the foundation of childhood for 100,000 years.
Freedom for unstructured, self-directed, unmonitored exploration where kids invent worlds, climb trees, and disappear for hours. 


For older kids, let’s give back space. Third spaces. Parks. Community spaces. Places where teens can exist together without needing a reason. 


The perfect example of this is sleep-away camp. Every summer, 14 million kids go away from home without technology. They live in cabins, eat god awful food, do activities all day, and somehow, someway, they don’t miss there snapchat streaks. Because when the thing your phone promises– connection, stimulation, belonging– is already happening all around you… The phone isn’t so interesting.


You know Thinking back to my first detox initiative, the Happiness Project, something finally makes sense. The project didn’t work because we convinced teenagers to do a detox. It worked because we created a space. A space where we could connect. A space where we could feel seen. A space where we could sit with our emotions instead of needing to escape from them. 


        Sometimes I think back to my neighbors, Jack, Henry, George, atop that tree house. The Dorty family ended up moving away, and I didn’t see them much into my teenage years, but sometimes, sometimes I think about what could have been. What would childhood have looked like growing up connected in a community? Us, a band of boys, prowling the streets of New York,. Staying up too late, making bad decisions, exploring abandoned alleyways, blowing shit up, approaching girls, getting rejected, finding love, escaping from mischief, protecting each other, running, and fighting, and laughing, and screaming, and crying, and not looking down because we didn’t need to. Because the space that we craved was all around us. The space we needed was all around us. Space was inside of us. 


________________








[a]Reworking this section thoughts?